<!----------------------------- cubething.dev -------------------------------->

# Collected Notes - 5/15/24 --

These notes follow readings on notions of the self, the philosophy of mind,
Buddhist thought (especially Zen and Theravada schools), Heidegger, Husserl, and
Carnap. They were made in preparation for my essay on the Heidegger-Carnap
debate, which I am using to apply to graduate school. The essay was originally
written as my senior thesis in 2017, which earned me honors status. Any
footnotes are comments that I have left while typing these notes up. Headings
are arbitrary cut-off points which I have added for organization. I will list a
bibliography at the end of this page.

## I. On the Self

(Following a reading of _Analytical Buddhism_ by Miri Albahari (2009))

Consciousness exists prior to the self. The self is a projection of the Other --
the self is self reflection; the self arises from an understanding of our
existence within society; we, objectify others & eventually realize they do the
same to us. This sense of self-objectification is the core of the self.

But what is consciousness before the self? What do young children experience?
What do non-empathetic people experience? Surely they are conscious and have a
self. This self seems to occur before we learn to _mask._ Our inner, inatrind
(?) impulses - this is the core self; the inner child (through the lens of
internal family dynamics). Pure impulse; but still natural, thinking. Purely
ipseic.

The self is a matter of socialization? Would a feral human - with no human
contact from birth - be a self? -- The scenario is somewhat absurd, because
humans require love and sustenance from their mother to survive. The sense of
self and other develops at even this early stage. The self arises through
_care._ Heidegger's existentiale --

The experience of breastfeeding as essential to self. Heidegger says: anxiety
finds us as individuals. We are born, thrown into the world, immediately
conscious of our separation and made anxious. The birth of on individual --
literal birth, metaphorical birth. The womb is the sum of forgetfulness - the
breast as well - social comfort, no longer alone, safe in numbers. The child
becomes its own through the sense of anxiety.

Child become aware of death around three or four years of age. They know, then,
that life moves forward; things can change drastically. Things are impermanent.
There can only be so much one can do. This being-toward-death causes(?) us to
act with morality; it compels us to make our lives _meaningful_. This is where
we become truly human for the first time. But there is a third state.

Children become aware of history around seven years. Now they can conceptualize
a past: what has been done before, and can situate themselves within the
restricted possibilities of life.

With this third and final development, the hcild is now fully capable of
understanding _meaning_. This sense of _meaning_ is essential to a life
well-spent. Meaning - or _care_ - is what drives us to make something of
ourselves, it's what drives us to reflect on ourselves.

Now, can a child before the realization of these three existentiales be a self?
Surely even the smallest child is a self, yes. But the child does not become an
authentic self until they realize past, present, and future.

Once the three existnetiales are realized their possibility are always
re-evaluated. We are constantly re-inventing our selves. The relation to the
past situates us in facticity - the hard fact of not only the history of society
but our _own_ history is brought to light. This cycle of self-invention is
constantly reoccurring - a bout of anxiety sends back to the drawing board. Our
selves are an invention - the self is a _theory_ about our behavior. It is a
kind of predictive model, as much as it is a motivational model. The self is
both description and prescription.

Bare consciousness precedes selfhood. Selfhood comes in degrees. Selfhood is a
theory, a model, which describes our past and prescribes virtues, direction, a
general goal-orientation.

Consciousness is a matter of _awareness_ - awareness of stimulus, awareness of
difference, etc. Selfhood arises as a conscious reflection on the conscious
inputs(?) - a sort of feedback loop or self-reference. (It is so hard not to
keep saying "self.") A kind of meta-consciousness. (Who else thinks this?)

Any human-like intelligence must be aware of its existentiales, must be
conscious, must be historically oriented, present oriented, and future oriented.

An AI must have memory, be self-reflective, and death-avoidant or death-oriented
to be a self.

A thermostat may well have a small degree of consciousness. But this is not
remarkable, as it is only mechanical consciousness. It doesn't have any
orientation.

Animals - rabbits - have anxiety, some small history, present-orientation and
death-avoidant behavior. But they lack self because they do not have the
self-reflective power. They cannot conceptualize[^1] themselves _as_ rabbits;
they operate off of instinct. A social orientation is _essential_ to selfhood.
The self arises as a means to orient oneself within the society; the self arises
to tell us what _roles_ to play, how to play them.

[^1]:
    This is probably not quite true. I can imagine a rabbit having some small
    notion of a self. They do after all, have mothers and familial relations. Of
    course, their social lives are not nearly as important to them as ours.
    Further, language is probably a huge part of our conscious awareness. At the
    very least it is a deeply important part of our human awareness.

The role of authenticity then is to help guide us to the right place for us
within a wider social structure. The self-directedness - our sense of happiness
and meaning and virtue - guide us to a role that fits with our disposition.

Authenticity then is an evolutionarily advantageous behavior. IT helps promote
the cohesion and efficiency of the group while maintaining a stable position for
the individual. To have a a sucesful life, then, we must be able to commune with
our sense of meaning and be able to find that role within a society.

Traditionally, authentic behavior revolved around the family unit -
self-expression within the bounds of father, mother, child. In work: employer,
employee. The restriction of our possibilities is essential to maintaining
meaning. If survival requries working long hours to feed your family, you will
value the work you do; meaning will come from the joy of providing for others.
In bourgeouis society - in a society of mechanical excess - we are now
confronted with a crsis of _roleplay_ -- we have to come up with new characters
to play. Our possibilities have been blown open. We no longer know who to be.
It's a period of great social anxiety and upset. Next comes the awareness of
death - global climate change threatens us. And finally, the acknowlegement of
history - our possibilities are restricted by the past, our social shitory, etc.
The society plays the role of the self - the Leviathan, the Legion. But, a
society lacks consciousness - there are no sense organ allegories, or
self-reflective behavior.[^2] It's easy to personify a state or a race, but
impossible to see it as an entity.

[^2]:
    I think that Deleuze or Foucault might like to counter this point, but I'm
    not well-read enough to know how.

The sense of self seems to be wrapped up in the body. Anger, or self-defence,
keeps our bodies safe - but it keeps our perception of ourselves safe too.
Attacks on the self result in emotioan repsonse - anxiety alerts us to unsafety;
we then respond wih anger, fear, sadness, ... The point is, when the self is
attacked, we either fight back or we flee; sadness (freeze) admits defeat; anger
defends the self by attacking the other in an attempt to assert the dominance of
their own social position; fleeing (fawn) indicates a desire for no conflict --
neither state should change.

In any case, the emotions reveal to us the enactive natuer of the self as
_social_ -- any emotioanl response indicates a social position. Our emotions are
_always_ direct towards others - and our own emotions tell us who we are.

Our rational mind has nothin to do wit hteh self. Rather, the capacity for
thought is not reelvant to selfhood except in its ability to reflect on
intuition -- Actually the self must be created in time -- so our felective
capacity lends itself to the possibility of a self; without reflfection a self
is not possible. Reflectio nis necessary but not sufficient for ipseity.

This theory is good and well, but it needs empriica lbacking. What does the
science say?

What role does objective fact play in our lives? It's a matter of creating a
socia lreality - a web of belief. These beliefs may be entirely coherent but
still wrong - that is to say, they may not correspond to our underlying,
subject-free reality. All objects, then, are _conditioned_, relying on the
subject for their reification. There is _nothing_ beyond the subjective or
intersubjective reification. Intersubjective reification _is_ reality. But
reality is conditioned upon the existence of nothing. This is flatyl
contradictory, but it is the possibility of contradiction which underlies the
possibility of truth, of fact.

A truth is a true statement within a logic. A fact is a truth which corresponds
to the empricial evidence. There is nothing outisde of empricial fact. So if we
are to engage with the possibility of facts, we must engage with the nothing.

A logic is a system of truth-bearing. Can a dialectic logic get us towards
nothing, or _mu_? I do not think so.[^3] Nothing is that which underlies the
possibility of truth, so we cannot use language to describe it. At least, not
formal language. To investigate mu, we must _experience_ it. Mu lies beyond
sense experience. To experience mu is to experience the nature of pure
consciousness. This is done through meditative practice.

[^3]:
    Kantian dialectics would have us finding mu in the transcendental conditions
    of consciousness _per se_. It is the possibility of our experience of
    anything at all. So in this sense dialectics can lead us there. Of course,
    the point of the Kantian dialectic is to show us that multiple coherent
    systems can coexist and be equally provable while coming to contradictory
    conclusions. The question is what to make of this.

## II. Panpsychism

An analysis of the mind - the hard problem of consciousness - seems to lead to a
panpsychism. This is supported by Buddhist thought. Parallels can be found in
Leibniz, Kant, Schopenhauer, Russell. The idea is that physical theories and
phenomena show us things about the world, for instance, what matter _does_,
without postulating what matter _is_.

IF we are to account for the hard problem without ??ing substance dualism, we
need a theory about the metaphyics of physics which accounts for mental
properties. Thus property dualism.

Zen thinkers could claim that beneath the observable - at the deepstlevel -
there is _nothing_. What does this amount to? How is it with the nothing? A
russelean monist would say that this _is_ a fundamental substance, a quiddity.
Does _mu_ relate to this? Mu would be non-substance, a denial that physical
theor is _about_ anything? That all phenomenon have empty content. ?

Anyways, clear parallels to Heidegger in the notion of Nothing underlying the
possibility of science.

## III. The Aufbau

Preface to the Aufbau is very powerful. Strong dedication to collective action,
working against poetics as the myth of the great man, who can "erect a
comprehensive" theory of philosophy.

Carnap believes that philosophy must proceed on scientific, collective grounds,
and the metaphysics is to be utterly eliminated. At least this is his view
in 1928. The preface to the second in 1961 allows for metaphysics, but excludes
it from the domain of scientific thought.

We can see the underlying political commitments in Heidegger and Carnap, the
Nazi charmer and the socialist dweeb.

--

Carnap's constructional system is focused on _structure_ only; objects are
secondary to relations. Heidegger proceeds from the opposite angle: objects -
and therefore essences - are basic. Carnap focuses on the correlation problem --
which objects fit into the structure? -- as opposed to the metaphysical essence
problem -- what is the essential nature of the relation? Carnap claims that
metaphysical questions do not arise in a constructional system. He is right. But
he is not claiming that metaphysics should not be done, only that it cannot be
scientific, and therefore cannot be systematized. I think Heidegger - at least
the later Heidegger - would agree.

cit. Aufbau II, esp II.B ss 20-22.

The principle of tolerance is saying that multiple logical or relational systems
can coexist; the aufbau claims that they can all be constructed from the same
basis, and that therefore there is only one science. Science ~== logic; truth
within a logical system is a _formal_ sense of truth, scientific truth is
another _kind_ of truth. Do metaphysical statements, because of their
non-scientific status, get denied any claim to truth?[^4]

[^4]:
    Yes. This is not stated directly in the Aufbau, but is made clear in
    Carnap's other writings. Anything non-scientific is therefore nonsense,
    strictly speaking; it cannot be adequately spoken of (formalized into
    empirical-logical statements) and therefore cannot carry a truth-value.

## IV. Method.

Carnap seems to be heavily indebted to the MArburg school of Neokantianism, espc
the transcendtal method. See SEP Neokantianism ss 2.1 (p12-13). The method feels
very similar to the project of hte Aufbau. -- Confirmed, see SEP Carnap ss 2.1
(p21). Influence from Bruno Bauch, Herman Nohl, Heinrich Rickert, and ofc.
Frege.

The general idea of Carnap's project: put all knowledge onto a _constructed,
deductive_ basis. construction is opposed to _analysis_; instead of moving from
the fact to the necessary condition as in the transcendental method, start from
scratch - bare intuition, and logical structure[^5] -- then construct the world
from there. Why this approach? Carnap wanted a firm basis for the sciences and
for knowledge in general.

[^5]: Who was it that says the analytics operate under the myth of the given?

Large influence from (Russell, 1914).

carnap tries to build a deductive _system_ of knowledge. He is a structuralist.
Could post-structuralists give us a critique of his method?

Carnap wishes to dispose of metaphysics as "the last vestige of imagination,"
SEP Carnap (p30-31), (Carnap 1929).

--

What I'm interested in critiquing is the philosophical method itself; what goals
do Carnapd nad Heidegger have in mind, how do they achieve these goals? How can
we justify these projects? Are they in any respect similar? What historical and
political influences do they share? How have they been interpreted, and aht
schools have come from their readings?

This is too much to cover in a single ssay. Let's break it up.

1. Metaphilosophical aims - influences ,goals politics.
2. Methodological aims - how to go about their projects and why?
3. Contextualization - put the thinkers in history, consdier their influences
   and their influence.

- Focus is primarily on the methodology.
- Motivation for the paper is the historical context and contemporary relevance
  for metaphilosophy and methodology (analytic vs continental thought).

--

Eidetic reduction - Reduction of phenomena ('moments of matter') to their ideal
propositional form - reduction to the _Ideas_, thus eidetic. "Eidetic" from
Greek "eidos" meaning form. This is transcendental as it involves reducingthe
phenomena to its _necessary_ components. Recall that the transcendental method
involves investigating concepts to find the necessary condition for hteir
existence or conceptualization, e.g. in the Kantian phenomenology of the first
critique.

Descarte's wax as example: Vary the object until it ceases to be stuff, and by
that means we discover the essence of the thing. Melting, smelling, etc of the
wax does not change that it is wax. A triangle may vary in size, angle, etc but
adding a fourth side ensures it is no longer a triangle.

Potential issue: vague but pragmatic conepts e.g. soup - when is a soup no
longer a soup? is a hot dog a sandwich? What is gneder? Conceptual boudnaries
can be fluid and arbitrary but this does not ruin the concept. They perhaps are
not "pure," perhaps are not suited for investigating the nature of congition.
But perhaps _all_ concepts are like this.

--

Carnap on contradiction: He would allow for intuitionistic maths e.g. no law of
non-contradiction, because it can be symbolically formalized. Where does the
structural fetish come from? - Clarity and rigor. Wittgenstein and Russell.
Sense and nonsense - this is the essential question -- what can be reasoned
about, and what goes beyond reason? Very Kantian.

## V. Faith

## (x) "Heidegger and Carnap on the Overcoming of Metapyhysics" (Stone 2005)

This paper focuses on the Husserlian background of both Heidegger and Carnap's
attempted overcoming of metaphysics. Both Heidegger and Carnap want to criticize
Husserl for reinstating metaphysics in phenomenology. They both believe that the
proper method for overcoming metaphysics is to analyze language, but they do so
in very different ways. Heidegger's hermeneutic project is to take account for
the historico-grammatical syntax of our language. For Heidegger, we must take
responsibility for what we have already said. That is, we have to perform a
hermeneutics of all language, especially scientific language, which takes the
etymology and usage of common terms into account. This includes understanding
the necessary underlying concepts which we carelessly speak about. Carnap's
project is quite similar, but instead of focusing on history, Carnap focuses on
logical syntax. Carnap believes that we can create a logically sound, formal
language with specific rules and translate our concepts into it, thus avoiding
the potential nonsensical errors of natural language. While Heidegger's project
wishes to revitalize (the German) language, Carnap's project is parallel to
natural language. In order to see how this maps to metaphysics, we'll need to
understand how Husserl conceives of it.

Since at least Aristotle, metaphysics has been the study of the first principles
that underlie the various sciences and their most generic objects. For instance,
chemistry studies chemicals and physics (dynamics) studies the (moving) body. In
addition to the special sciences, there is logic, which studies the analagous
structures of each special science. And, above them all lies metaphysics, the
science of first principles as such. Importantly, these first principle are
accessible through intelligible intuition. That is, although we cannot access
them through our sense (i.e. they are suprasensible), we have access to them
through our capacity to reason.

Kant criticized this system for its inherent contradictions. [todo:
kantian dialectics]. Humans only have access to external objects through our
sensible intuition (i.e. through our access to space and time), and to internal,
psychological facts through our intellectual intuition. These sensible objects
(phenomena) are representations of the underlying 'real' objects (noumena),
which are purely intellectual. Although the phenomena are merely representations
which occur to perceiving creatures like us, the fact of their being is reliant
on the structure of our cognitive faculties. If the grounds of science lie in
transcendental principles and causes, then what Kant wishes to say is that
metaphysics ought to concern itself only with the way objects appear _to us,_
and not _as they are in themselves._ Famously, we do not have access to the
thing-in-itself, the noumena as such. So, Kant saves the part of metaphysics
which matters the most: the foundations of science. However, his motiviation for
this is not just to save the sciences from falling into skepticism. His primary
goal is to "limit reason in order to make room for faith." This faith is the
rational belief in God as the foundational basis of our capacity for freedom.

Stone thus recognizes three core aspects of Kant's critique. He will go on to
claim that both Heidegger and Carnap levy these critiques against Husserl.

1. Acknowledgement that metaphysics _does_ correctly identify the grounds of
   science in the transcendental causes and principles of reason.
2. Denial of (access to) the supersensible subject matter of metaphysics.
3. Goal to save practical philosophy by limiting our knowledge.

But this leaves open two large concerns. First, the notion of noumena seems to
be largely without basis. Why believe in a realm of suprasensible objects if we
are only given access to the phenomena which represent them? That is, what is
the distinction between the phenomena and the noumena, if such a thing exists?
Husserl, Heidegger, and Carnap will all take the same position here: there is no
such thing as the noumena. We must go "to the things themselves." Secondly, if
our capacity to understand phenomena at all is based on our rational faculties,
those faculties must surely need a grounding. It is based on these critiques
that Husserl begins the task of phenomenology.

Husserl proposes the realm of Ideas, which constitute the phenomena as objects
in themselves. Husserl's claim is that the phenomena exist as
objects-in-themselves, independently of our own interpretation. Rather,
phenomena are those objects whose whole existence is dependent on our
postulation through an intentional (directed) interpretation of sense
experience. This transcendental process reveals to us the _Urregion_ of pure
consciousness, containing the necessary and absolute entities (phenomena as
such) which grounding our human faculties. But here Husserl has solved the
problems of noumena and faculty by the creation of a realm of suprasensible
entities! He has, in effect, reinstated metaphysics. What about the
soteriological goal for ethics? For Husserl, ethics would appear as an objective
science the same as any other. What is objectively good is what must necessarily
appear objectively good. The human being, as a creature in the world, is not
free to act independently of its own private interest. Only the pure ego is free
to do so, and this pure ego's freedom consists solely in the direction of
objective positing (determining, then, what exists), or to cease the positing
altogether, thus carrying out the phenomenological reduction and annihilating
the world. An ethics is possible here, but it is 'Gnostic ethics, not Kantian;
the command which the transcendetnal subject autonomously gives itself would be:
"Return to your own true infinite nature"' (Stone 2005, p5).

In order to overcome Husserl's reinstatement of metaphysics, both Heidegger and
Carnap partake in a critique of natural language. However, they do so in
opposite ways. Heidegger's hermeneutic project largely deals with the historical
and grammatical syntax of language. His is a revisionary project, while Carnap
wishes to create a syntactically perfect language into which to translate our
propositions, thus eliminating any ambiguity or error. Both involve a specific
kind of clarity in the use of language. Heidegger's approach is largely involved
in _poesis_, whereas Carnap's is involved in the mathematical rigor of truth
propositions. Heidegger wishes to use language as an eruptive force to break
through our complacency with ill-defined or incorrect uses of language,
especially within the Cartesian tradition. His approach involves the use of
literary devices to draw the reader's attention toward particular perspectives
and problems. His goal is to shake the reader, and get them thinking. Meanwhile,
Carnap wishes to provide a mathematically rigorous and semantically coherent
system of logic. Carnap seems to believe that natural language is insufficient
for logical clarity. He does not dismiss natural language as an essential aspect
of our being, but relegates the majority of its use to nonsense. This is not to
say that Carnap thinks formal languages are somehow more pure than natural
language; it is only that they are truth-preserving, where natural language need
not be. In both cases, there is an essential aspect of human freedom involved.
For Heidegger, it is quite easy to spot: He states quite explicitly that what we
need to understand in order to ground the sciences is our general attitude
towards the world. He codifies this in his theory of mood. For Carnap, the
freedom involved is the freedom of a choice of formal language. Carnap's
construction theory relies on a denial to engage with the fundamental attitude
underlying scientific theory. In fact, he thinks it is _dangerous_ to examine it
in close detail, lest we muck it up. For both thinkers, this choice of general
attitude is at the heart of their respective projects. Both Heidegger and Carnap
believe that science is complete, that it will provide for us the answers to all
possible questions about beings in general. What then is left for philosophy?
For Carnap, all that is left is the clarification of concepts through
construction, a mapping from our fundamental phenomenological ideals and the
structure of cognition, combined with empirical data, to create a trace in
finitely many steps from the initial cause to the rational postulation. For
Heidegger, the completion of science entails for us a new calling, the call to
find a new clearing in which to let the light shine through. For Carnap, science
is all there is: anything else is a dangerous pretension of the old style of
thought. His moral imperative is a Nietzschean one: we new philosophers, the
scientistic philosophers, are a special and rare breed. The old philosophers,
those metaphysicians, are to be left in the past. He declares this somewhat
remarkable position in the preface to the _Aufbau_

> We feel that there is an inner kinship between the attitude on which our
> philosophical work is founded and the intellectual attitude which persently
> manifests itself in entirely different walks of life [...] It is an
> orientation which demands clarity everywhere, but which realizes that the
> fabric of life can never quite be comprehended. [...] It is an orientation
> which acknowledges the bonds that tie men together, but at the same time
> strives for free development of the individual. Our work is carried by the
> faith that this attitude will win the future. (Carnap 1975, xviii)

It is known that Carnap would have Nietzsche on his bedside table. It should
come as no surprise that Carnap's general attitude would be influenced by such a
powerful author. Yet Heidegger also famously read Nietzsche, in fact writing a
four-volume treatise on his work. In any case the practical choice of a formal
language in which to base the future of philosophy is in fact a moral
imperative. The choice provides the basis for clear thinking; and to refuse this
calling is a moral failure, a sign, perhaps, of weakness.

Heidegger might claim the same point. Yet his calling stems closer to
Kierkegaard than Nietzsche. It is through the fundamental mood of _Angst_ that
we come to realize the Nothing, that is, the possibility of the nihilation of
all things; our general Being-towards-death, and thus the possibility of our own
nihilation. In this sinking away of all beings our possibility to become
insignificant is revealed to us. Thus, it becomes the moral responsibility of
Dasein to become significant - a rather Nietzschean take. It is Dasein's
possibile insignficance, its inability to account for all it has said, e.g. to
ground the sciences, which reveals to it its responsibility to take
accountability for its use of language. Metaphysics is a demand to take
accountability for what has already been carelessly said. Like Carnap's vision,
metaphysics "demands clarity everywhere, but [...] realizes that the fabric of
life can never quite be comprehended."

## (x) "CARNAP AND HEIDEGGER: POLITICAL ANTIMETAPHYSICS VERSUS METAPHYSICS AS METAPOLITICS" (Dambock 2024)

\1. Political interpretations are necessary for an accurate reading of C&H.

\2. Common upbringing in German youth movements. Heidegger was part of the
dialectical theology movement, which sought to replace science with revealed
knowledge (p4). Opposition to Gogarten laid roots of Carnap's anti-metaphysics ?
-- German revolution of 1918-19 further culturally splintered the thinkers. --
Weber (1994) (Science as a Vocation) -- founding of the 20s intellectual crisis.
Weber: science is not appropriate for practical philosophy: Three ways it can be
useful:

1. Science provides practical means (inquiry)
2. Science tells us the expected outcome of actions - though it is up to us to
   choose which are good or bad.
3. It allows us to perform logical analysis of basic attitudes - which values
   can be derived? - Weber p19

Can clearly see Carnap's metaphilosophical project here.

Overlap between Heidegger and Carnap lies in the influence of Max Weber and the
influence of the German youth movement, especially the thought that science is
inappropriate for _action_.

For Carnap, this was a sign that metaphysics was to be overcome: That the
scientific worldview was to be universal and to educate all. The peak of the
liberal Enlightenment project. p7pp2.

Would be wise to understand Heidegger's [???]

More on Carnap's metaphilosophy: Carnap 1929 "Science and Life". Claim:
Heidegger wants to _banish_ rationality from practical philosophy. Is this a
fair characterization? Not a banishment, but an admittance of poor fit. Cf
Stone 2005.

\3. Davos. \4. Uberwindung

The initial linguistic critique even the later Carnap would dispute.

Introduction to Metaphysics (H. 1975ff). Explicit political critique. Also
earlier work on technology.

\5. Antimetaphysics and Metapolitics. Claim: Heidegger used metaphysics as a
method of propping up Nazi claims. Debatable at best (p14). The tactic: Ignore
consequences: only engage with ideas in rhetoric; engage in _overpowering_, in
strong-man tactics.

Carnap on ideology (1934a,b). Metaphysics as an opium of the educated. In
particular, Hiedeggerean non-argumentative language is [irrational?],
pseudo-scientific. Has the effect of _timidity_, _awe_. He clearly sees these
are vices! Later Carnap would soften and allow _tolerance_ as long as no
cognitive claim was made. Essential to the mp task I claim he has. But the
critique of H. remains! They are anti-rational and so incomprehensible. (Carnap
1967).

## (x) Late night thoughts in maddi's dms

i think i found my topic. The incommensurability of facts and explanations.

Weber

the character of rigor in the sciences and humanities would also be good. they
are deeply related. also the manner of speaking. there is a gap between fact and
meaning, and so between formal and poetic language

I'm always more articulate in my head -\_-

the question of the hc debate is how to deal with this incommensurability

origins from Weber, husserl, wittgenstein (for carnap)

largely ignores the political environment, maybe include as a footnote

and of course what they mean by metaphysics. for carnap it's false use of
language ie an attempt to capture meaning by using the jargon of fact. for
hiedegger it's this too, though his overcoming is closer to an acceptance of
this fruitful misuse than an avoidance of it. after all, ignoring it is not
going to remove one from the problematic right i guess hiedeggers overcoming is
more to do with an existential hermeneutic; he tries to avoid a realm of
supersensible ideal entities like what husserl reimposed. explanation happens
through an analysis of our lived experiences as Dasien (as the abstract human
being, understanding its Being ie the fundamental conditions and structure of
its existence) in any case he engages, and considers it right for philosophy to
take over for religion in this aspect. pretty explicitly so. the later
hiedeggers talk of gods is directly reminiscint of Weber's discussion of gods in
"science as a vocation."

the nature of science as the collection of fact, but this activity presupposes
its own worth; it is outside the scope of science to explain itself. in the end
the significance of science and of facts has to do with the individual and is
subjective in nature. Hiedegger makes this explicit in existential analysis
(especially the French existentialists whom he loathed). Carnap makes room for
freedom by allowing a free comportment toward whatever system is relevant, so
long as it is logical and complies to empirical verification. This is more
freedom than one may see on the surface; it allows for freedom to decide on a
proper logic, a subjective choice of meaning which amounts to a worldview. this
is, to wittgenstein and to Carnap, tantamount to ethics, to religion. meaning
beyond this is given in the arts. he is especially fond of Nietzsche - as is
Hiedegger

the subjective basis of science is phenomenology. this is the connection to
husserl. both thinkers agree that his system is flawed, and both take a kantian
approach to overcoming his reinstantiation of traditional (ancient) metaphysics

the motivation for this overcoming is largely political: the german youth
movement and general political climate of the early 20th century

how is this related to metaphysics? the German youth movement was dedicated to
freeing itself from the restrictions of scientific thought. It originates in the
Romantic ideal, and prides itself in its ability to know the irrational. This
leads us to the incommensurability of fact (science) and meaning (metaphysics?)

metaphysics advanced itself as the secularization of the systematized mystical
worldview.

Through its dissociation from religion it took on the character of science and
lost its grasp on meaning. this was happening as far back as aristotle, and
followed by the scholastics.

probably want to say more about the nature of metaphysics and its relation to
meaning, and the overcoming of metaphysics through use of poetic language in
hiedegger; the acknowledgement of showing rather than telling at the key to
meaningful language (as meaning is essentially subjective; but perhaps, as Kant
would say, universally subjective)

telling is the scientific characteristic. it tells the truth, it tells fact.
showing is the poetic characteristic. it shows the truth, it shows meaning.
Meaning can only be gestured at. Fact can be articulated.

both can have formal characteristics. logic is the formal character of the
sciences. hiedegger describes a form of showing with formal characteristics, i
forget the name of it

this is perhaps what he hints at when he refers to the "particular rigor of the
humanities"

what remains, i suppose, is to investigate where this gap comes from. probably
it is due to the subjective/objective distinction - though this discussion may
not be absolute. it would be fruitful to refer to the third critique here, on
universal subjectivity.

and to perhaps dig more into wittgensteins thought on this, if he had any

and definitely to recall being and time and husserls eidetic system

but all of that is like... masters thesis level work if not higher

## (x) CJ The X - How Jordan Peterson's Suits Taught Me Fashion

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LpHFcylNGqg

he makes a really good point about knowing yourself, actually, he talks about
how fashion and identity are wrapped up in each other and how aesthetic
practices in the postmodern era are arbitrary. his historical framework around
beauty as an objective value (from the enlightenment onwards) to an elite value
(cultural experts ie romantics into early modernity) to a postmodern
free-for-all (post-60s fashion subculture boom) is i think reflective of a
bigger cultural movement. the crisis of modernity is the realization that
cultural norms are essentially subjective; post-kantian philosophy
(phenomenology and positivism) attempt to deal with this by finding a universal
subjectivity, or removing the cultural aspect of subjectivity altogether. so
really the problem is, how do we deal with the death of our gods? heidegger
says, we worship by cultural norms; we are determined by our societies and fall
into line. this has become harder in postmodernism, when those cultural lines
have begun to disintegrate.. carnaps says we should worship nothing, that
subjective matters are to be discarded as meaningless, and that any serious
scholarly work should be done in the scientific realm. not that carnap thinks
these things are culturally meaningless, but that they are arbitrary. i think
that it's unfair for him to make this claim, and i think our current cultural
crises of extreme individualism is at least partially due to this attitude.

will i cite a video essay in my writing sample? yes.

maddi — Today at 4:33 PM

citing a video essay is fine i think

im going to watch that video when i get home

cubething — Today at 4:34 PM

it is a very good video essay. it gets a bit focused on the author's life story
towrads the middle-end and a bit confessional, but i think that's part of the
genre.

maddi — Today at 4:34 PM

that sort of thing is kind of hit or miss for me

i guess it depends on whether i personally like the video essay person or not

cubething — Today at 4:35 PM

i agree, but i understand why people do it. again the search for authenticity.
and yeah, the search for personal meaning through parasocial ties. it's
parasocial for the author, too.

maddi — Today at 4:35 PM

yes definitely

cubething — Today at 4:36 PM

and i think it's important to understand at least part of the author's backstory
to understand the context of the essay. this is something i'm increasingly doing
in philosophy generally, and it's resulted in a far more nuanced understanding
of the works as a whole. they are not separate from the culture that created
them, nor the authors.

## (x) Munchausen trilemma

How do we justify knowledge? There seems to be a three-progned problem.

1. Foundationalism / dogmatism. There are certain propositions which we must
   take for granted. They are indubitable and so can serve as a starting point
   of knowledge.
   - Note the similarity to the metaphysical standpoint as discussed in
     Perelman.
   - This could include logical dogmatism viz Carnap
2. Coherentism / circular arguments. Certainty occurs just when a loop is
   discovered.
3. Infinitism / infinite regress. Justification continues ad inifnitum, whether
   causal or logical.

The clearing as the epistemological foundation of knowledge, as the dogmatic
origin of human knowledge? This does not seem to change throughout Heidegger.

Empirical logic as foundation of knowledge, with phenomenological foundation?
Dogmatism of axiom. Though later Carnap would reject this. His epistemological
project then is unclear; it becomes pragmatic in the later years, though the
choice of a coherent system is always required. Compare the protocol sentence
struggle.

## (x) Beyond the Limits of Knowledge

Three limits. Expression, iteration, cognition.

Limits of expression: We cannot express, for example, that all things are in
flux, because the very nature of flux means that at this instant a thing has
none of the same properties as it had in the previous instant. Yet we _can_
express this; it would be impossible for me to tell you so otherwise; and even
if I were to remain silent, I could still think this thought by my internal
language. (Even if said internal language was not properly linguistic in the
vocal and formal sense of the term.) Another example: Prime matter in Aristotle
is 'pure possibility,' but this possibility cannot be expressed, because it is
the bearer of all properties. These paradoxes of expressibility are transcendent
(they go beyond what can be expressed) yet exhibit closure (they are nonetheless
expressed).

Limits of iteration.
