Facts and Values - The Problematic

On the Kantian view, there are two worlds, the inner (prior) and the outer
(posterior). Our inner world is the mind, the outer world is the world of
objects. It goes without saying (on this model) that cognition occurs entirely
within the mind. As subjects, we only have direct access to the inner world. All
access to the outer world is mediated by the senses. These twain metaphysical
universes correspond to two sources of knowledge (_episteme_), the _a priori_
and the _a posteriori_. _A priori_ cognition relates the mind to itself, dealing
with matters of logic and reason. The _a posteriori_ has to do with the mind's
relation to the outside world. Methodologically, the _a priori_ relates to
deductive logic (syllogistic logic in Aristotle, which later evolved into
logistics with Frege, Russell, and Wittgenstein). It is typically assumed that
this formal or term logic, being prior, is the _modus operandi_ of cognition.
The senses feed new information from the posterior world into the prior world.
With the combination of the prior logics and the posterior impressions we
cognize the world. _Facts_ are those things which are verifiable _a posteriori_
through the senses; _truths_ are those which are logically consistent, _a
priori._

An additional distinction is made between knowledge which is analytic and
knowledge is synthetic. Analytic knowledge is deduced from premises; they are
true "by definition." Synthetic knowledge is "new;" it extends beyond the
stipulated definition to provide information about properties. Logically, there
are then four kinds of knowledge, but it is usually split into two. On the
intuitive view, analytic knowledge occurs _a priori_ through deductive
reasoning, as all logic reduces eventually to tautologies and axiomatic
stipulations. Synthetic knowledge proceeds _a posteriori_ by the introduction of
new facts through the senses, which then interacts with the faculties of _a
priori_ reason to produce new knowledge.

And finally, there is the interpersonal aspect. _Subjective_ impressions occur
to a single subject, while _objective_ impressions occur to _all_ subjects.
Subjective impressions are typically associated with the emotions, the whim, or
the will, while objective impressions are associated with the external world. As
the name implies, objective impressions typically have to do with the objects of
experience. It is typically understood that knowledge proceeds from the
individual to the interpersonal. Knowledge requires verification not only
through the senses, but through the sense of other subjects, in order to be
deemed "true" knowledge. This brings us to eight possible combinations, but
again it is typically reduced. The subjective/objective distinction is a matter
of verification, so while knowledge can be analytic _a priori_ or synthetic _a
posteriori_, it is then either qualified as subjectively experienced (in which
case it is viewed as deficient) or objectively verified.

Overall, scientific knowledge can be characterized as _objectively true facts:_
logically consistent synthetic knowledge which corresponds to objectively
verifiable sense impressions.

Where does value fit into this picture? Can evaluations be characterized as
knowledge as depicted above? If so, then any objectively guiding principles must
correspond to scientific knowledge of the properties of objects.

Evaluation is intuitively associated with the emotions, as we tend to feel
disgust, fear, joy, pleasure, etc in accordance with our judgments. We associate
the two so strongly that they are sometimes considered synonymous, though always
they are considered correlative. The emotions are typically considered to be
felt subjectively, which throws a wrench into the notion of a scientific value
theory.
